Secure design (#1090)
OWASP/CheatSheetSeries: cheatsheets/Secure_Product_Design_Cheat_sheet.md

# Secure Product Design Cheat Sheet

## Introduction

> The purpose of Secure Product Design is to ensure that all products meet or exceed the security requirements laid down by the organisation as part of the development lifecycle and to ensure that all security decisions made about the product being developed are explicit choices and result in the correct level of security for the product being developed.

Author: Well spotted. I've opted for the US (despite that being wrong) ;-)

## Methodology

> As a basic start, establish secure defaults, minimise the attack surface area, and fail securely to those well-defined and understood, defaults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a basic start, establish secure defaults, minimise the attack surface area, and fail securely to those well-defined and understood defaults.
```
Extraneous comma

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking, monolithic architectures have a smaller "attack surface" than micro-services architecture. Think of the analogy of the perimeter of a fully assembled jigsaw puzzle vs the total perimeter of all the disassembled pieces. That's one way of viewing the differences in the attack surface between those to architectural extremes. However, just because a monolithic architectures have a smaller "attack surface", that doesn't mean it should outweigh all other architectural concerns. (Perhaps that is stated elsewhere in this CS.) Re-usability, scalability, maintainability, complexity, etc. also need to be considered. Maybe its a given that that's understood. Or not. I personally don't like implicit assumptions, so I would suggest perhaps mentioning the overall balance. (Hint: Threat modeling is your friend.)

Secure Product Design comes about through two processes:

1. **_Product Inception_**; and
2. **_Product Design_**

> The first process happens when a product is conceived, or when an existing product is being re-invented. The latter is continuous, evolutionary, and done in the agile way, close to where the code is being written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first process happens when a product is conceived, or when an existing product is being re-invented. The latter is continuous, evolutionary, and done in an agile way, close to where the code is being written.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we need a reference to the DevSecOps CS here? (I found that [here](https://github.com/dominikdesmit/owasp-devsecops-cheat-sheet). Not sure why it's not with the rest of the cheat sheets.)

The reason that I say that is security + agile is not intuitive and takes a lot of hard thinking to get right. Most agile efforts that I've seen only get as far as having a box in a PowerPoint diagram labeled 'security' and a couple arrows going in and out of it. And if you drill down on that security box, you get a whole lot of "magic happens here" and it's obvious that they haven't thought about it at all. So, let's help them get there.

> ## Security Principals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Security Principles
```

Reviewer 2: @szh - Good catch! :+1:

Separation of duties is a fundamental principle of internal control in business and organizations. It is a system of checks and balances that ensures that no single individual has control over all aspects of a transaction. This is done by assigning different tasks to different people, so that no one person has control over the entire process. This helps to reduce the risk of fraud and errors, as well as ensuring that all tasks are completed in a timely manner. Separation of duties is an important part of any organization's internal control system, and is essential for maintaining the integrity of the organization's financial records.

### 2. The principle of Defence in Depth

> The principle of Defence in Depth is a security strategy that involves multiple layers of security controls to protect an organization’s assets. It is based on the idea that if one layer of security fails, the other layers will still be able to protect the asset. The layers of security can include physical security, network security, application security, and data security. The goal of Defence in Depth is to create a secure environment that is resilient to attack and can quickly detect and respond to any security incidents. By implementing multiple layers of security, organizations can reduce the risk of a successful attack and minimize the damage caused by any successful attack.

Reviewer: Same with "Defence" vs "Defense"

Reviewer 2: However you wish to spell it, it usually is hyphenated because it is a single noun.

Author: 100%

> ### 3. The principal of Zero Trust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. The principle of Zero Trust
```

Zero Trust is a security model that assumes that all users, devices, and networks are untrusted and must be verified before access is granted. It is based on the idea that organizations should not trust any user, device, or network, even if they are inside the organization’s network. Instead, all requests for access must be authenticated and authorized before access is granted. Zero Trust also requires organizations to continuously monitor and audit user activity to ensure that access is only granted to those who need it. This model is designed to reduce the risk of data breaches and other security incidents by ensuring that only authorized users have access to sensitive data.

> ### 4. The principal of Security-in-the-Open

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. The principle of Security-in-the-Open
```

> Security in the Open is a concept that emphasizes the importance of security in open source software development. It focuses on the need for developers to be aware of the security implications of their code and to take steps to ensure that their code is secure. This includes using secure coding practices, testing for vulnerabilities, and using secure development tools. Security in the Open also encourages developers to collaborate with security experts to ensure that their code is secure. Finally, it emphasizes the need for developers to be aware of the security implications of their code and to take steps to ensure that their code is secure.

Reviewer: Seems somewhat repetitive:
"It focuses on the need for developers to be aware of the security implications of their code and to take steps to ensure that their code is secure"
"Finally, it emphasizes the need for developers to be aware of the security implications of their code and to take steps to ensure that their code is secure."

Reviewer 2: Probably needs hyphenated as well: "Security-in-the-Open".

Author: Removed the repeated line (flow of thought and self editing FTW). Added the hyphenation.

## Security Focus Areas

### 1. Context

> Where does this application fit into the ecosystem of the organisation, which departments use it and for what reason? What kinds of data might it contain, and what is the risk profile as a result?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where does the application in question fit into the ecosystem of the organisation, which departments use it and for what reason? What kinds of data might it contain, and what is the risk profile as a result?
```

Reviewer 2: I would prefer 'under consideration' rather than 'in question', but I could live with this.

> The processes employed to build the security context for an application include [Threat Modelling](Threat_Modeling_Cheat_Sheet.md) - which results in security related stories being added during **_Product Design_** at every iteration of *product delivery* - and when performing a Business Impact Assessment - which results in setting the correct Product Security Levels for a given product during **_Product Inception_**.

Reviewer: Same spelling question here - in the US it's Modeling with one "l"

Reviewer 2: It's spelled both ways. There's a lot of UK vs US spelling differences like that. We should at least be consistent for the same word. Ideally, we probably should be consistent for a given CS.

Author: Opted for US again here

Context is all important because over-engineering for security can have even greater cost implications than over-engineering for scale or performance, but under-engineering can have devastating consequences too.

### 2. Components

> From libraries in use by the application (selected during any **_Product Design_** stage) through to external services it might make use of (changing of which happen during **_Product Inception_**), what makes up this application and how are those parts kept secure? In order to do this we leverage a library of secure design patterns and ready to use components in the defined in your Golden Path / Paved Road documentation and by analysing those choices through [Threat Modelling](Threat_Modeling_Cheat_Sheet.md).

Reviewer: Same spelling question about "analysing" vs "analyzing"

Author: Opted for US again here

> From libraries in use by the application (selected during any **_Product Design_** stage) through to external services it might make use of (changing of which happen during **_Product Inception_**), what makes up this application and how are those parts kept secure? In order to do this we leverage a library of secure design patterns and ready to use components in the defined in your Golden Path / Paved Road documentation and by analysing those choices through [Threat Modelling](Threat_Modeling_Cheat_Sheet.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From libraries in use by the application (selected during any **_Product Design_** stage) through to external services it might make use of (changing of which happen during **_Product Inception_**), what makes up this application and how are those parts kept secure? In order to do this we leverage a library of secure design patterns and ready to use components defined in your Golden Path / Paved Road documentation and by analysing those choices through [Threat Modelling](Threat_Modeling_Cheat_Sheet.md).
```

A part of this component review must also include the more commercial aspects of selecting the right components (licensing and maintenance) as well as the limits on usage that might be required.

### 3. Connections

> How do you interact with this application and how does it connect to those components and services mentioned before? Where is the data stored and how is it accessed? Connections also describes the lack of connections as well. Think about the segregation of tiers that might be required depending on the Product Security Levels required and the potential segregation of data or whole environments if required for different tenants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do you interact with this application and how does it connect to those components and services mentioned before? Where is the data stored and how is it accessed? Connections can also describe any intentional lack of connections. Think about the segregation of tiers that might be required depending on the Product Security Levels required and the potential segregation of data or whole environments if required for different tenants.
```

Adding (or removing) connections is probably a sign that **_Product Inception_** is happening.

### 4. Code

Code is the ultimate expression of the intention for a product and as such it must be functional first and foremost. But there is a quality to how that functionality is provided that must meet or exceed the expectations of it.

Some basics of secure coding include:

>    1. Input validation: Verify that all input data is valid and of the expected type, format, and length before processing it. This can help prevent attacks such as SQL injection and buffer overflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. Input validation: Verify that all input data is valid and of the expected type, format, and length before processing it. This can help prevent attacks such as SQL injection and buffer overflows.
```

   2. Error handling: Handle errors and exceptions in a secure manner, such as by logging them in a secure way and not disclosing sensitive information to an attacker.

>    3. Authentication and Authorization: Implementing strong authentication and authorization mechanisms to ensure that only authorized users can access sensitive data and resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   3. Authentication and Authorization: Implement strong authentication and authorization mechanisms to ensure that only authorized users can access sensitive data and resources.
```

   4. Cryptography: Use cryptographic functions and protocols to protect data in transit and at rest, such as HTTPS and encryption - the expected levels for a given Product Security Level can often be found by reviewing your Golden Path / Paved Road documentation.
   5. Least privilege: Use the principle of the least privilege when writing code, such that the code and the system it runs on are given the minimum access rights necessary to perform their functions.
   6. Secure memory management: Use high-level languages recommended in your Golden Path / Paved Road documentation or properly manage memory to prevent memory-related vulnerabilities such as buffer overflow and use-after-free.
   7. Avoiding hardcoded secrets: Hardcoded secrets such as passwords and encryption keys should be avoided in the code and should be stored in a secure storage.
   8. Security testing: Test the software for security vulnerabilities during development and before deployment.
   9. Auditing and reviewing the code: Regularly audit and review the code for security vulnerabilities, such as by using automated tools or having a third party review the code.

>    10. Keeping up-to-date: Keep up-to-date with the latest security best practices and vulnerabilities to ensure that the software is as secure as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   10. Keeping up-to-date: Keep the code up-to-date with the latest security best practices and vulnerability fixes to ensure that the software is as secure as possible.
```

Reviewer 2: Regarding point number 8 at line # 73: If you meant to imply (which I think you probably do) that security testing should be done **_both_** during development and the a final time just prior to deployment, I'd try to make that more explicit. Otherwise some may forgo the "just prior to deployment" part because they think the later has already been satisfied by the former since you have to develop software before you can deploy it. This may be important when their managers start shouting "Why are you testing this again in PROD? Didn't you just test the latest build that we are deploying in DEV?". That's especially true when behind schedule or over budget. We need to equip devs to push back so making it more explicit will allow less wiggle room for managers who want to twist things just to get something out on schedule or under budget. Let's not make it easy for them to do that. We all know that DEV and PROD have different set of assumptions and very different environments. A PM may not know that.

Author: Excellent point!

> Ensure that you integrate plausibility checks at each tier of your application (from frontend to backend) and ensure that you write unit and integration tests to validate that all critical flows are resistant to the results of [Threat Modelling](Threat_Modeling_Cheat_Sheet.md). Use that to compile use-cases and misuse-cases for each tier of your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that you integrate plausibility checks at each tier of your application (e.g., from frontend to backend) and ensure that you write unit and integration tests to validate that all critical flows are resistant to the results of your [Threat Modelling](Threat_Modeling_Cheat_Sheet.md). Use that to compile use-cases and misuse-cases for each tier of your application.
```

Reviewer 2: Hmm... I'm not fond of the phrasing "all critical flows are resistant to the results of your Threat Modelling".

Maybe a better way of stating that would be something like "all threats discovered during Threat Modelling have been mitigated to a level of risk acceptable to the organization"???

### 5. Configuration

Building an application securely can all too easily be undone if it's not securely configured. At a minimum we should ensure the following:

1. Bearing in mind the principal of Least Privilege: Limit the access and permissions of system components and users to the minimum required to perform their tasks.
2. Remembering Defense in Depth: Implement multiple layers of security controls to protect against a wide range of threats.
3. Ensuring Secure by Default: Configure systems and software to be secure by default, with minimal manual setup or configuration required.
4. Secure Data: Protect sensitive data, such as personal information and financial data, by encrypting it in transit and at rest. Protecting that data also means ensuring it's correctly backed up and that the data retention is set correctly for the desired Product Security Level.
5. Plan to have the configuration Fail Securely: Design systems to fail in a secure state, rather than exposing vulnerabilities when they malfunction.
6. Always use Secure Communications: Use secure protocols for communication, such as HTTPS, to protect against eavesdropping and tampering.

> 7. Perform Regular updates - or leverage maintained images: Keeping software, docker images and base operating systems up-to-date with the latest security patches is an essential part of maintaining a secure system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Perform regular updates - or leverage maintained images: Keeping software, docker images and base operating systems up-to-date with the latest security patches is an essential part of maintaining a secure system.
```

Reviewer 2: Seems like # 7 could use a reference to best-practices. Not sure we have a CS for that, but surely OWASP or NIST has something we could reference.

Author: NIST does for patch management and I've linked CIS for hardened images now too
